Data cleaning rewrite (#450)
worldbank/dime-data-handbook: chapters/data-processing.tex

%------------------------------------------------

\begin{fullwidth}

% Chapter overview
The tasks described in this chapter have many different names.
Some say data cleaning, others data munging, or maybe data wrangling.
All mean transforming raw data into a more convenient format for your intended use.
This is the most time-consuming step of a project's data work, 
particularly when primary data is involved.
It is also essential for data quality. 
This chapter describes the different tasks involved in the cleaning process,
and outlines the workflow our team developed to make the process efficient and transparent.

% What is data cleaning
This chapter describes all tasks needed to make newly acquired data ready for analysis.
The first section will guide on making your data \textit{tidy},
so the relationship between rows and columns in a dataset is well-defined.
This includes removing duplicated observations.

> The second section describes quality assurance checks, which are necessary to verify the accuracy of your data

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The second section describes quality assurance checks, 
which are necessary to verify the accuracy of your data.
```

> After that, identifying information is typically no longer needed,
> the third section outlines steps to remove direct identifiers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After that, identifying information is typically no longer needed,
therefore the third section outlines steps to remove direct identifiers.
```
Dont know if _therefore_ is best, but some glue word is missing here.

Finally, the last section discusses how to explore each variable in your dataset and 

> make sure that the dataset is as well documented and easy to use as possible.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
make sure that the dataset is as well documented and as easy to use as possible.
```

	the unit described by the data. In datasets, it is ideally what each row represents. \url{
		https://dimewiki.worldbank.org/wiki/Unit_of_Observation}}
 may be ambiguous in many raw datasets.
In this session, we will discuss the ideal format to handle data,
which we call a \textit{tidy} format.

\subsection{Unique identifiers}

% Uniquely and fully identifying variable
The first step in tidying data is to understand its unit of observation
(what makes a row),
and find out which variable or set of variables is the \textbf{unique identifier}\sidenote{\url{
		https://dimewiki.worldbank.org/ID\_Variable\_Properties}} for each observation in your dataset.
Ensuring that observations are uniquely and fully identified
is arguably the most important step in data cleaning.
It may be the case that the variables expected to be unique identifiers are either incomplete or contain duplicates.
It is also possible for a dataset to have no unique identifier, 
or that the identifier involves a long string that is difficult to work with, such as a full name.
In such cases, cleaning begins by carefully creating a variable that uniquely identifies the data.

> Note that while modern survey tools create unique identifiers for each data submission,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that while digital survey tools create unique identifiers for each data submission,
```
_Digital_ or _electronic_ is more appropriate than _modern_.

that is not the same as having a unique ID variable for each observation in the sample,
as there can be multiple submissions for the same observation.
The unique identifier will be used to link data on observations in one dataset 
with data on the same observations in other datasets, 
such as other rounds of data collection and different data sources.
Therefore, you must keep a canonical dataset of all observations in your data.
This \textbf{master dataset}\sidenote{\url{
		https://dimewiki.worldbank.org/Master\_Data\_Set}}
is discussed in detail in Chapter 3, 
and contains a record of all units ever encountered for each relevant level of observation,
as well as their corresponding unique identifiers.

% Merchand

> Checking for duplicated entries and making sure that each observation has a unique identifier are usually part of data quality monitoring.
> The lack of a unique identifier should be addressed as soon as data is received,
> so you can keep track of observations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
We are making the case that the first step is to check for unique identifier, but in the first sentence I highlighted here, we say that it is a part of _data quality monitoring_ which is the section after this section on tidy data. That is strange.

And the second data says that this should be addressed as soon as data is received, but you have already said above that the first cleaning task is to do exactly that.

I think both these sentences can be deleted.

\texttt{ieduplicates} and \texttt{iecompdup},
two Stata commands included in the \texttt{iefieldkit}
package\index{iefieldkit},\sidenote{\url{https://dimewiki.worldbank.org/iefieldkit}}
create an automated workflow to identify, correct and document
occurrences of duplicate entries.
One advantage of using \texttt{ieduplicates}\sidenote{\url{
		https://dimewiki.worldbank.org/wiki/ieduplicates}} 
to correct duplicated entries is that it creates \textit{duplicates reports}
that record which corrections made and why.
Even if you are not using this command,

> it is important to include similar records in the \texttt{Documentation} folder.

Reviewer: do we need to make a specific recommendation to the Documentation folder? apart from the section on `iefolder` this book does not specify this specifically where something is saved.

\subsection{Tidying raw data}

Though raw data can be acquired in all shapes and sizes,

> development data is most commonly transferred as one or multiple tables.\sidenote{\textbf{Table:}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
development data is most commonly received as one or multiple tables.\sidenote{\textbf{Table:}
```
I do not think transferred is incorrect, just think that received makes more sense to most people reading this book

	a two-dimensional dataset formed by rows and columns. 
	Also called ``rectangular data''.
	Examples of non-rectangular data are a text, or files, such as images.}
Similarly, these tables can organize information in multiple ways,
and not all of them result in easy-to-handle datasets.
Fortunately, a vast literature of database management has identified the format
that makes interacting with the data as easy as it can be.

> When applied to statistics, we call data in such format \textbf{tidy}.\sidenote{\textbf{Tidy data:}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In database management this is called \textit{normalization},
but when applied to statistics, we call data in such format \textbf{tidy}.\sidenote{\textbf{Tidy data:}
```
Since you are mentioning database management literature I think we should give the term so people can look it up if they want. This feels more substantial and more credibly stands on the shoulders of database giants.

Author: cool, I didn't know that term

	Datasets where each column represents one variable,
	each row represents one observation, 
	and all variables in a table have the same unit of observation.}
A dataset is tidy when each column represents one variable,\sidenote{\textbf{Variable:} 
	the collection of all data points that measure the same attribute.}
each row represents one observation, 
and all variables in a table have the same unit of observation.

> Every other format is \textit{untidy} or just \textit{messy}.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Every other format is \textit{untidy}.
```
I think it is confusing to use both terms, and I think _messy_ is too normative. A well organized wide dataset is objectively not messy, it is still untidy tho. If messy is a common term, then maybe say "Every other format is \textit{untidy} (sometimes also called \textit{messy})." so that we indicate which one is preferred.

This may seem trivial, but raw data, 
and raw survey data in particular,
is rarely received in a tidy format.
To contribute to the confusion, 
Stata users typically call each column a ``variable'', 
and each row an ``observation'',

> even though they are not necessarily the same thing.

Reviewer: I have heard users from all languages call a row an observation interchangeably. So I am not sure we should say this.

I still think there is a point, as a column in Stata is not only called variable by its users, that is what it is officially called. So make the point about column/variable in Stata, but I do not think we can say that Stata users call a row and observation more or less than other people.

Author: done in 39a1b40

> Every messy dataset is messy in its own way,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Every untidy dataset is untidy in its own way,
```
See my comment above about messy being too normative, lets only use untidy.

but the most common case of untidy raw data encountered in development research
are datasets consisting of multiple units of observation stored in the same table. 
If your rows include multiple nested observational units,
having an identifying variable for each row doesn't mean having an identifier for each observation.
Survey data containing nested units of observation is typically 
imported from survey platforms in \textbf{wide format}.\sidenote{\textbf{Wide data:}
	a table where a single variable is divided into multiple columns,

> 	for example one for each individual.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
	for example one for each individual in a household.
```
I think that people will read _individual_ as _respondent_ and equalize that to _unit of observation_ if we do not add something indicating that individual is a subunit of the main unit of observation in the wide dataset.

}
Take, for example, a household survey that includes household-level questions,
as well as a household member roster.
The resulting raw dataset usually consists of a single table
where questions from the household member roster are saved in different columns, 
one for each member, with a corresponding member suffix,
and household-level questions are represented by one column each.
So you have one column called \texttt{ownsmotorcycle},
but a few columns of the format \texttt{gender\_1}, \texttt{gender\_2}, etc.
The data is saved in this format because it's the most efficient way to transfer it:
adding different levels of observation into the same table allows for data to be transferred in a single file.
However, this leads to the widespread practice of interacting with data in wide format for a large part of a project,
although this is not the most efficient way to do so.

To understand how dealing with wide data can be complicated,

> just suppose you need to calculate the share of women in your sample.

Reviewer: You jump into this without letting the user know you are still talking about data sets with households as the main unit of observation. It could just as well be read as the individuals is the main unit of observation, and then the point we want to make is lost.

Author: addressed in 302cbd5

The first thing you will need to do is change the format of your table so that each row represents one individual.
Tidy datasets, on the other hand, 
are easier to handle because observations can be aggregated and linked consistently,
without additional steps.
They are also easier to clean, 
as each attribute only needs to be checked once,
as corresponds directly to one question in the questionnaire.

> We have discussed only wide data so far,
> but as mentioned earlier, there are unlimited ways for data to be untidy.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The only example of untidy formats we mentioned so far is wide data,
but as mentioned earlier, there are unlimited ways for data to be untidy.
```
We have discussed many things other than wide data so far. But it is the only example we have given.

> An alternative example is a table containing information on transactions
> and on the parties involved in each transaction.
> In this case, the firm-level information will be repeated for all transactions a given firm was involved in.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An alternative example is a table containing information on transactions
and on the firms involved in each transaction.
In this case, the firm-level information will be repeated for all transactions a given firm was involved in.
```
Parties and firms are the same thing, right? I had did not understand where firms came form. I had made a Venmo transaction earlier tonight and thought of parties as individuals the first time I read it.

Analyzing data in this format would give more weight to firms that conducted more transactions,

> which may not be consistent with your design.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
which may not be consistent with your research design.
```

The basic process behind tidying a dataset is simple: 
first, you need to identify all the variables that were measured at the same level of observation;
then, create separate tables for each level of observation;
finally, reshape\sidenote{\textbf{Reshape:}
	transform a dataset in such a way that the unit of observation represented by a row changes.} 
the data and remove duplicated rows 
until each table is uniquely and fully identified by the ID variable 
that corresponds to its unit of observation.
In the earlier household survey example,
household-level variables will be stored in one tidy dataset, 
and household-member variables are reshaped to member level and stored in another tidy dataset,
which also contains the household ID for each individual.
So the household ID is intentionally duplicated in the household members table.
In the transaction data example,
the result of the tidying process would be one transaction-level dataset, 
containing variables indicating the ID of all firms involved;
and one firm-level dataset with a single entry for each firm.

Reshaping tables is the most intricate task in this process,

> so you should be very familiar with commands such at \texttt{reshape} in Stata and \texttt{pivot} in R.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
so you should be very familiar with commands such as \texttt{reshape} in Stata and \texttt{pivot} in R.
```

Another key aspect in this process is to make sure that ID variables are consistent across tables,
so they can always be linked.

> For each tidy table, you should have a corresponding master dataset in the same unit of observation.

Reviewer: Should we? Like if you have a nested loop that is fertilizer per season per crop per plot, should you have a master data set for each of them? Let's discuss!

Author: There must be a clear way to connect it to a master dataset

Author: addressed in e23ce52

%------------------------------------------------

\begin{fullwidth}

% Chapter overview
The tasks described in this chapter have many different names.
Some say data cleaning, others data munging, or maybe data wrangling.
All mean transforming raw data into a more convenient format for your intended use.
Although original data typically requires more extensive data cleaning than secondary data,
it is broadly agreed that this is, on average, the most time-consuming step in a project's data work \citep{dasu2003exploratory}.
This chapter describes the different tasks involved in the cleaning process,
and outlines the workflow our team developed to make the process efficient and transparent.

% What is data cleaning
This chapter describes all tasks needed to make newly acquired data ready for analysis.
The first section will guide on making your data \textit{tidy},

> so the relationship between rows and columns in a data set is well-defined.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
so the relationship between rows and columns in a dataset is well-defined.
```
data set => dataset

Author: argh, I did this a lot! thanks for catching it!

This includes removing duplicated observations.
The second section describes quality assurance checks, which are necessary to verify the accuracy of your data
After that, identifying information is typically no longer needed,
the third section outlines steps to remove direct identifiers.
Finally, the last section discusses how to explore each variable in your dataset and 
make sure that the dataset is as well documented and easy to use as possible.

\end{fullwidth}

%------------------------------------------------

> \subsection{Before you get started}

Reviewer: This is the only chapter that starts with a subsection. Not incorrect but I thought it broke the flow a little. I think you can have `\section{Identifying the identifier(s)}` and then say "Before you get started".

The data cleaning tasks described in this chapter will prepare the raw data
for quantitative analysis.
To make this complex process less error-prone,
we recommend that no changes be made to the content of data at this point
(with one exception that will be carefully discussed).
Correcting outliers, imputing values and creating derived indicators
are all research decisions, and are therefore considered part of analysis (discussed in the next chapter).
Therefore, the main output at this stage, the cleaned dataset,
contains almost exactly same information as the raw data,
but in a format that is easier to interact with.  

\section{Identifying the identifier(s)}

% Intro
The very first step in creating statistical software-friendly data sets
is understanding the data acquired,
and translating this understanding into an intuitive format.
This section discusses what steps may be needed to make sure that each row
in a dataset represents one observation.
This may seem trivial, but should not be taken for granted.
Getting to such a format may be harder than expected,
and the \textbf{unit of observation}\sidenote{\textbf{Unit of observation:}

> 	the unit described by the data. \url{

Reviewer: ```suggestion
	the unit described by the data, often the same as the unit of each row in the dataset. \url{
```
We cannot say only "_unit of each row in the dataset_" as that is not the definition, but my experience from training is that it is adding "_unit of each row_" that makes people not already aware of this concept get what it means.

Author: Maybe "ideally" instead of "often"?

Reviewer: Ideally when you use datasets, yes. But unit of observation also exits in non-relational datasets. For example, a unit of observation can be a satellite image, it can be a document, in qualitative research it is the respondent itself, etc. 

So in all datasets the row is ideally the unit of observations, but not all unit of observations are ideally a row.

What about:
```suggestion
	the unit described by the data (in datasets, it is ideally what each row represents). \url{
```

Author: done in d2cd334

		https://dimewiki.worldbank.org/wiki/Unit_of_Observation}}
 may be ambiguous in many raw datasets.
But having data in a tidy format is the best way to manipulate it, 
particularly aggregating and cross-referencing.
You will need to do manipulate data as soon as it is received,
so you can assure its quality.
If you are conducting primary data collection,
you can start coding the data tidying before the data is acquired,
since you will know in advance in which format it will be received.

\subsection{Unique identifiers}

% Uniquely and fully identifying variable

> The first step in tidying data is to understand its unit of observation (what makes a row),

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The first step in tidying data is to understand its unit of observation,
```
I do not think we should say something that seem to put an equality sign between observation and row. A row is often an observation, but, especially in new data sources, an observation can be a time period or a file (ex and image).  

I know I just suggested adding row as an description of what unit of observation means above. I think it is a good way to explain the concept, but we should stay away from `observation==row` as it is less and less true in both direction in new data sources.

Author: I see. You're right. There's no good vocabulary here though, since we typically use "observation" to call a row. Maybe in this case we should say "The first step in tidying tabular data is to understand what unit is represented in each row"? I'm not sure it makes sense to talk about tidy data for non-tabular data.

Reviewer: Do we say something about tidy data is something specific to tabular/relational datasets? If we caveat this whole section with that, then we can be more relaxed about statements like this.

and find out which variable or set of variables is the \textbf{unique identifier}\sidenote{\url{

> 		https://dimewiki.worldbank.org/ID\_Variable\_Properties}} for each row.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
		https://dimewiki.worldbank.org/ID\_Variable\_Properties}} for each observation in your dataset.
```
See reasoning above.

> Ensuring that observations are uniquely and fully identified

Reviewer: Should we somewhere here discuss that the identifier used should be unique the project? For example, national IDs, social security numbers etc. fulfills the requirement of fully and uniquely identifying IDs, but should, for obvious reasons, not be used as the ID by the project.

Author: I think this should go on the part about de-identification.

Author: moved to #470

is arguably the most important step in data cleaning.
It may be the case that the variables expected to be unique identifiers are either incomplete or contain duplicates.

> It is also possible for a data set to have no unique identifier, or that the identifier involves a long string, such as a name.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is also possible for a dataset to have no unique identifier, or that the identifier involves a long string, such as a name.
```
data set => dataset

In such cases, cleaning begins by carefully creating a variable that uniquely identifies the data.

> Note that while modern survey tools create unique identifiers for each submitted data record,
> that is not the same as having a unique ID variable for each individual in the sample.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that while modern survey tools create unique identifiers for each data submission,
that is not the same as having a unique ID variable for each observation in the sample,
as there can be multiple submissions for the same observation.
```

> The unique identifier will be used to
> cross-referenced with other records, such as
> other rounds of data collection and
> different data sources.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The unique identifier will be used to link data on observations in one dataset 
with data on the same observations in other datasets, 
such as other rounds of data collection and different data sources.
```

package\index{iefieldkit},\sidenote{\url{https://dimewiki.worldbank.org/iefieldkit}}
create an automated workflow to identify, correct and document
occurrences of duplicate entries.
One advantage of using \texttt{ieduplicates}\sidenote{\url{
		https://dimewiki.worldbank.org/wiki/ieduplicates}} 
to correct duplicated entries is that it creates \textit{duplicates reports}
that record which corrections made and why.
Even if you are not using this command,
it is important to include similar records in the \texttt{Documentation} folder.

\subsection{What makes data ``tidy''}

% Where these concepts come from
Before discussing the details of how to clean your data,
we need to define a few concepts that will be used in this chapter.
They refer to the structure of the data,
and have long been discussed in the database management literature.
This section is based on Hadley Wickham's definition of tidy data,\cite{tidy-data}
which uses a terminology that is more intuitive for users of applied statistics,
we have added our own twist based on the jargon of development research.

% Definitions
Development data is typically acquired in the form of \textbf{tables},

> two-dimensional datasets formed by rows and columns.\sidenote{\textbf{Table:}

Reviewer: In this paragraph we are inconsistent with where we put the sidenote. I agree with what have been said before that in general it should come after the full sentence, but I think the exception to that should be when we define a word, like **table**, **data point**, **variable** and **tidy data**.

Author: fixed in 1029ad4

Reviewer: The side note sits on the sentence in table.

Also, we should discuss repeating the definition from the text in _sidenote_. I am not opposed to it, but we should apply that consistently across the book if we want to keep that.

	a two-dimensional dataset formed by rows and columns. 
	Also called ``rectangular data''.

> 	One example of non-rectangular data is a text.}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
	Examples of non-rectangular data are a text, or files, such as images.}
```

Each element or cell in this table is a \textbf{data point}, that is,
a value representing a measure of an attribute for one individual unit.\sidenote{\textbf{Data point:}

> a value representing a measure of an attribute for one individual unit.}

Reviewer: Define data point either in text or in side not and not in both

Author: Remove duplicated text in the new version (mostly)

> For example, in a household survey,
> two of the attributes usually measured are gender and age.
> The measures of gender and age for each household member are data points.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, information on gender and age 
is often collected in a household survey,
and then then each recording of gender or age is a data points.
```

A \textbf{variable}\sidenote{\textbf{Variable:} the collection of all data points that measure the same attribute.}
 is the collection of all data points that measure a given attribute.
In the example of a household survey,
each variable will correspond to one survey question.
Finally, each variable will contain data points for different individuals in a given unit of observation.

> In our example, each household member is a subject, and the unit of observation is a person.

Reviewer: Unit of observation in a household survey is more often a household than a person.

Author: Right, it was meant to be a household roster. fixed in 3ee3f81

The collection of all data points for each individual subject is an 
\textbf{observation}.\sidenote{\textbf{Observation:} 
	the collection of all data points representing attributes of the same individual or unit.}

% Tidy data
The ideal format to interact with any table or dataset is when
each column represents one variable,
each row represents one observation, 

> and all variables in a table have the same unit of observation.

Reviewer: I think somewhere here we need to make a point about a household survey creates several tables. One table where each unit of observation is a household, one where each is a household member where the same household has one row for each household member. So the household is intentionally duplicated in the household members table.

Author: The household _ID_ is interntionally duplicated in the household members table, right?

Reviewer: yes, the household _ID_ is replicated in a household member data set

Author: done in d2cd334

Datasets in this format are said to be \textbf{tidy},\sidenote{\textbf{Tidy data:}
	Datasets where each column represents one variable,
	each row represents one observation, 
	and all variables in a table have the same unit of observation.}
and all others are \textit{untidy}.
This may seem trivial, but the raw data acquired is frequently untidy.

> Tidy data sets are easier to handle,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Tidy datasets are easier to handle,
```
data set => dataset

as observations can be aggregated and linked consistently,

> and easier to clean, as each attribute only needs to be checked once.

Reviewer: I think we need to describe what a wide data set is, as only in comparison to that, where the attribute of age is in one variable int he household member table, instead of in multiple variables where each age variable represents another household member in that household.

% An example of untidy data
A very simple way for our survey example to became untidy is to include

> household-level variables in the same data set,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
household-level variables in the same dataset,
```
data set => dataset

Author: done in 74ad7e1

such as whether the household has a refrigerator.
In this case, some attributes would be measured at
household level, and others at household member level,
and it would not be possible for each column to represent a variable
\textit{and} for each row to represent an observation \textit{at the same time}.
Either the household-level variable would be repeated for all its members,
or member-level variables would be stored in 

> \textbf{wide format}.\sidenote{\textbf{Wide data:}

Reviewer: I think it would be helpful if this comparison comes sooner. As if we are introducing working with data wide vs. working with data tidy are to competing or alternative philosophies. I think we should introduce them as both are commonly used, but that we think tidy is better, and here are tools and concepts for how to successfully adopt the philosophy of tidy.

Author: done in the new version

	a table where a single variable is divided into multiple columns,
	for example one for each individual.
}
An alternative example is a dataset on transactions that also contains information
about the parts involved in each transaction on the same table.
The next two sections will outline steps to check if your data is tidy,

> and to tidy it if it is not.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and how to tidy it if it is not.
```

\subsection{Tidying raw data}

% Is the uniquely identified data tidy?
Sometimes, making sure that data is uniquely and fully identified 
is enough to yield a tidy dataset.
This happens when a data source or survey instrument
contains a single unit of observation.
If you are working with data in this format,
you may skip the tidying process,
which can become quite intricate.
In this case the cleaning process will result in a single dataset.

% Examples of untidy raw data
The most common case of untidy raw data encountered in development research
are datasets consisting of multiple units of observation stored in the same table. 
If your rows include multiple nested observational units,

> having an identifying variable for each row doesn't mean having an identifier for each observation.

Reviewer: I think this sentence should come sooner as I think this is the core of the philosophy of tidy. That one observation often have sub-observations, and tidy data is to put sub-observations in their own table, where they are the main observation, while still keeping a link to the partent observation.

Author: done in d2cd334

This is the case of our previous example of untidy data:
a survey that collects both household and household-member level information.
In this case, 
the easiest way to handle the data is often to break it into two tidy datasets:
one at the household level, and one at the member level.
You will use these separate datasets for the rest of the data cleaning process.

% How to tidy data
Creating these two tidy datasets will involve a few different transformations.
Many common survey software export \textbf{wide datasets},
where each row represents the highest level of observation,
and variables observed in nested units are separated into one column per sub-unit,
such as \texttt{age\_1}, \texttt{gender\_1}, \texttt{age\_2}, \texttt{gender\_2}, etc.
To create tidy datasets from this data,
you first need to identify which variables were observed at which levels.
In our example, the presence of a refrigerator was collected at household level (the higher unit),

> while age and gender where observed at the member sub-unit.

Reviewer: We are almost in the end of this section but only here are we uncovering the core of what is the underlying reason why tidy is superior

These two sets of variables will be separated.
Create a tidy dataset containing only the unique row ID and the household level variables.
Then create another dataset containing only the unique row ID and the household-member level variables.
Note that the household-member dataset is still not tidy.
It needs to be \textbf{reshaped}\sidenote{\textbf{Reshape:}
	transform a dataset in such a way that the unit of observation represented by a row changes.}
to a \textbf{long} format.

> The reshaped data set will have a new variable indicating the member ID,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The reshaped dataset will have a new variable indicating the member ID,
```
data set => dataset

and its unique identifier will be the combination of household ID and member ID.
This is a tidy dataset, where
the \texttt{gender} and \texttt{age} variables are each represented by one column.
The reshape can be done using \texttt{reshape} in Stata, and \texttt{reshape2} or \texttt{pivot\_longer} in R.

% Polishing tidy data
One key aspect in this process is to make sure that ID variables are consistent across tables.

> This means that if you want to calculate the share of women members in a household,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This means that if you want to calculate the share of female members in a household,
```

Author: we said "gender" instead of "sex", so it's "women", not "female".

Reviewer: Ok. I agree with that in general, but I felt something was off in the sentence. What about:
```suggestion
This means that if you want to calculate the share of women in a household,
```

Author: How about "share of household members who are women?"

Reviewer: Your wording but putting it in a suggestion for easy addition.
```suggestion
This means that if you want to calculate the share of household members who are women,
```

Author: done in fa30e54

and link it back to the household-level table, 
you should be able to do so through the household-level row ID.
Another possible consequence of reshaping to keep in mind is that
empty observations may be created in the long dataset
(this is particularly the case in Stata).
Remember to remove such observations,
or they may bias aggregated measures --
counts and proportions in particular.

% Generalizing

> Alternatively, if each row in the untidy data set represents the lower level of observation,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Alternatively, if each row in the untidy dataset represents the lower level of observation,
```

the table that contains the lower level will already be in a tidy format.
Then all you need to do is make sure that 
all rows for the same larger unit have the same value for each variable,
and drop duplicated observations,
so that there is only one row per unit.
The tidying process can get more complex if the instrument includes multiple nested groups.
In agricultural surveys, it is not uncommon to find household-plot-season-crop level observations,
as well as different combinations of these level,
such as household-plot and household-crop-season, in the same dataset.
That means the steps of identifying the unit of observation of each variable
and reshaping the separated tables need to be repeated multiple times.
In these case, it is particularly important to be mindful of cross-table identifiers,
as they are often not the same as wide variables suffixes.

% Wrap-up
Tidying datasets can be a complex process.
However, the more nested groups a dataset includes,
the more efficient it is to deal with tidy data as compared to untidy.
Cleaning and constructing wide datasets, in particular,

> is a repetitive and error-prone process.

Reviewer: We should give the justification for tidy before we do the deep dive into it

The next step of data cleaning, data quality monitoring,
may involve comparing different units of observation.
Aggregating sub-units to compare to a higher unit is much easier with tidy data,
which is why we suggest getting your data into a tidy format as early as possible in your workflow. 
In addition to that, in the case of survey data,
tidying datasets will guarantee a one-to-one correspondence
between questions in the questionnaire and columns in the data.
Preparing the data for analysis, the last task in this chapter, 
is much simpler when that is the case. 

>  

Reviewer: Here are my overall comments on the tidy content:
- It is an unpolished diamond. All the content is there, and the content is good. But some improvements are needed.
- The main things is that we do not have a clear division on where we introduce vocabulary, intuition/justification and how to apply it. We keep talking about the justification long into how to apply it. I think it should be in this order:
  - Vocabulary: 
    - (table, data point, varaible unit of obs etc.)
  - Unique identifiers
  - Wide vs. Tidy - rename the subsection "_What makes data tidy_" to "_Working with data wide or tidy_"
    - Talk about most data has nested unit of observations. That is the core starting point of tidy.
    - Explain that wide is one table with many variables age_1, age_2 etc., while tidy is many tables but each variable exists only once, where an exact linkage between the tables.
  - Tools and practices working with tidy data
    - we have this sub-section already, but half of it is still comparing wide vs tidy data. By this point we should have made our argument for tidy and only focus on how to work with tidy.
- Through the chapter multiple terms are used to mean the same thing, which will be confusing to a reader not already a data expert. I am thinking especially at sub-unit observation vs. lower lever observation. We need to exaplin one of them in the beginning and then stick to that one through the chapter.
- Finally, maybe it is coming later, in construct section, but -- if it can be worked in somehow -- I think we should already here give the reader the intuition that you are not meant to reshape and merge tidy data back to wide. Even if your regressions are on the highest level unit of obs, you should not do that. You should instead aggregate or in other way transform your sub-units of observations to the parent units with sums and proportion, and then merge to the parent table, and that is still tidy.

Author: I see what you are saying now. Some content I think should go into the "wide vs. tidy" subsection:
- Tidy datasets are all alike but every messy dataset is messy in its own way
- Though every messy dataset is messy in its own way, survey datasets are messy in a similar way
- Survey data that contains nested units is typically imported from survey platforms as a "wide" dataset
- This is not because this is the most efficient way to manipulate datasets, but because it's the  most efficient way to put different observations into the same table
- But it is a widespread practice to handle wide data, mainly because of legacy (need a better word here)
- The format we recommend, "tidy" format, is different. It's used because it's the most efficient way to manipulate data, particularly when sub-units are present and need to be aggregated and combined.
- In this format, a wide dataset with different units of observation is broken into several datasets, each of them containing only the variables observed at a given unit of observation
- So household-level variables are stored in one dataset, and household-member variables are stored in another.

Reviewer: instead of legacy -> old customs, old practices etc.

Reviewer: Here is one example where I think you need to put wide in tidy in contrast to each other to explain your point. 

https://github.com/worldbank/d4di/blob/1029ad47f6590c62a4c27ed9034efb43c8d5bfa2/chapters/data-processing.tex#L138-L141

I can easily see someone who only works with wide data because everyone around them does that and no one has ever questioned it say: "_Sure, I also only have one column per variable, and they are called age_1, age_2, age_3 etc._" Once you understand tidy you see how that sentence is incorrect, but we should assume that the audience of this book does not understand tidy yet. In Stata each column is called a variable, so in that aspect it is always a one-to-one relationship between column and variable, making the sentence "_each column represents one variable_" sound unnecessary. Does this make sense?

Author: Add the wide example in the very beginning of the section, as one common example of untidy data

Author: done in 704d2b2

%------------------------------------------------

\begin{fullwidth}

% Chapter overview

> The tasks described in this chapter are called by many different names.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The tasks described in this chapter have many different names.
```

> Some would say data cleaning, others data munging, or maybe data wrangling.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Some say data cleaning, others data munging, or maybe data wrangling.
```

> It means transforming raw data into a more convenient format for your intended use.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
All mean transforming raw data into a more convenient format for your intended use.
```

Although original data typically requires more extensive data cleaning than secondary data,

> it is broadly agreed that this is, on average, the most time-consuming step in a project's data work \citep{dasu2003exploratory}.

Reviewer 2: Suggested rephrase: 'This is the most time-consuming step of a project's data work, particularly for projects using raw data.\citep{dasu2003exploratory}.

Reviewer: Can this be said and cited after the full-width section? It feels like a typo to all of a sudden have an in-line citation.

This chapter describes the different tasks involved in the cleaning process,

> and outlines the workflow that our team adopts to make it efficient and transparent.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
and outlines the workflow our team developed to make the process efficient and transparent.
```

% What is data cleaning

> Implementing the tasks described in this chapter will make data analysis much easier.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This chapter describes all tasks needed to make newly acquired data ready for analysis.```

The first section will guide on making your data \textit{tidy},
so the relationship between rows and columns in a data set is well-defined.
This includes removing duplicated observations.

> To assert the accuracy of your data, it must then go through quality assurance checks,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The second section describes quality assurance checks, which are necessary to verify the accuracy of your data
```

> as described in the second section.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

After that, identifying information is typically no longer needed,

> the following section will outline steps to remove direct identifiers.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
the third section outlines steps to remove direct identifiers.
```

> Finally, the last section discussed how to explore each variable in your dataset and 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Finally, the last section discusses how to explore each variable in your dataset and 
```

> make sure that it is as well documented and easy to use as possible.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
make sure that the dataset is as well documented and easy to use as possible.
```

\end{fullwidth}

%------------------------------------------------

\subsection{Before you get started}

% Don't mess with the raw data
The starting point for all tasks described in this chapter is the raw data,

> containing the exact files received, with no changes or additions.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
containing the exact data files acquired, with no changes or additions.
```

Be mindful of how and where these files are stored
as they cannot be re-created and nearly always contain confidential information.
Raw data files must \textit{never} be edited directly.
If the raw data contains confidential information,

> any tasks that precede de-identification must be carried on encrypted data.

Reviewer 2: this overlaps with content in chapter 4

Author: Remove this paragraph on debcb30

 
% Why cleaning is necessary
Raw data files may be received in a variety of formats, 
and are often not easy to handle using statistical software.
The data cleaning tasks described in this chapter will prepare the raw data
for quantitative analysis.
To make this complex process less error-prone,
we recommend that no changes be made to the content of data at this point
(with one exception that will be carefully discussed).
Correcting outliers, imputing values and creating derived indicators

> are all research decisions, and are therefore considered part of analysis.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
are all research decisions, and are therefore considered part of analysis (discussed in the next chapter).
```

> Therefore, the main output of data cleaning, the cleaned dataset,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Therefore, the main output at this stage, the cleaned dataset,
```

contains almost exactly same information as the raw data,
but in a format that is easier to interact with.  

\section{Identifying the identifier(s)}

% Intro

> The very first step in creating statistical software-friendly data sets

Reviewer 2: maybe "analysis-ready" rather that "statistical software-friendly"? although in practice the latter is what we are doing in practice, it isn't exactly the objective

Reviewer: I also got caught on "statistical software-friendly". I like "analysis-ready" better, but it is not ready for analysis as we have construction in-between. Would "analysis-friendly" be better?

is understanding the data acquired,
and translating this understanding into an intuitive format.
This section discusses what steps may be needed to make sure that each row
in a dataset represents one observation.
This may seem trivial, but should not be taken for granted.
Getting to such a format may be harder than expected,
and the \textbf{unit of observation}\sidenote{\textbf{Unit of observation:}
	the unit described by the data. \url{
		https://dimewiki.worldbank.org/wiki/Unit_of_Observation}}
 may be ambiguous in many raw datasets.

> But having data in a tidy format is the best way to manipulate it, 

Reviewer 2: define 'tidy' in a sidenote

Reviewer: Agreed. Or if the rest of the section is the definition and a definition does not fit in a sidenote, at least say that it is a principle for how to structure nested data. If that is what it is the best way to describe it.

Author: Made an attempt on this in 6c688d8

particularly aggregating and cross-referencing.
You will need to do manipulate data as soon as it is received,

> so you can assure its quality.

Reviewer 2: sentence has an error, doesn't make sense as is but i'm not sure how to correct

Reviewer: Is this a way to say what you want to say?
"_To be able to quickly assure the quality of the data, it is important that you do this manipulation immediately as you receive it._"

Author: Made an attempt on this in 6c688d8

If you are conducting primary data collection,
you can start coding the data tidying before the data is acquired,
since you will know in advance in which format it will be received.

\subsection{Unique identifiers}

% Uniquely and fully identifying variable
The first step in tidying data is to understand its unit of observation (what makes a row),
and find out which variable or set of variables is the \textbf{unique identifier}\sidenote{\url{
		https://dimewiki.worldbank.org/ID\_Variable\_Properties}} for each row.
Ensuring that observations are uniquely and fully identified

> is possibly the most important step in data cleaning.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
is arguably the most important step in data cleaning.
```

It may be the case that the variables expected to be unique identifiers are either incomplete or contain duplicates.

> It is also possible for a data set to have no unique identifier, or for the identifier involves a long string, such as a name.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It is also possible for a data set to have no unique identifier, or that the identifier involves a long string, such as a name.
```

> In such cases, cleaning begins by carefully creating a variable that uniquely identifies the data.

Reviewer 2: specify that the id variable should be numeric?

Reviewer: I think we discussed in relation to book or something else that string IDs are ok. Like `AB1234` or `12B42A` etc.

Note that while modern survey tools create unique identifiers for each submitted data record,
that is not the same as having a unique ID variable for each individual in the sample.
The unique identifier will be used to
cross-referenced with other records, such as
other rounds of data collection and
different data sources.
Therefore, you must keep a canonical dataset of all observations in your data.
This \textbf{master dataset}\sidenote{\url{
		https://dimewiki.worldbank.org/Master\_Data\_Set}}
should contain a record of all units ever encountered for each relevant level of observation,

> and their corresponding unique identifiers.

Reviewer 2: link this to discussion in chapter 3

Author: done in d2cd334

% Merchand
Checking for duplicated entries and making sure that each observation has a unique identifier are usually part of data quality monitoring.
The lack of a unique identifier should be addressed as soon as data is received,
so you can keep track of observations.
\texttt{ieduplicates} and \texttt{iecompdup},
two Stata commands included in the \texttt{iefieldkit}
package\index{iefieldkit},\sidenote{\url{https://dimewiki.worldbank.org/iefieldkit}}
create an automated workflow to identify, correct and document
occurrences of duplicate entries.
One advantage of using \texttt{ieduplicates}\sidenote{\url{
		https://dimewiki.worldbank.org/wiki/ieduplicates}} 
to correct duplicated entries is that it creates \textit{duplicates reports}
that record which corrections made and why.
Even if you are not using this command,
it is important to include similar records in the \texttt{Documentation} folder.

\subsection{What makes data ``tidy''}

> % Where these concepts come from

Reviewer 2: perhaps this should come even earlier?

Before discussing the details of how to clean your data,
we need to define a few concepts that will be used in this chapter.
They refer to the structure of the data,
and have long been discussed in the database management literature.

> However, this section is based on Hadley Wickham's definition of tidy data,\cite{tidy-data}

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This section is based on Hadley Wickham's definition of tidy data,\cite{tidy-data}
```

which uses a terminology that is more intuitive for users of applied statistics,

> with our own twist based on the jargon of development research.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
we have added our own twist based on the jargon of development research.
```

	each row represents one observation, 
	and all variables in a table have the same unit of observation.}
and all others are \textit{untidy}.
This may seem trivial, but the raw data acquired is frequently untidy.
Tidy data sets are easier to handle,
as observations can be aggregated and linked consistently,
and easier to clean, as each attribute only needs to be checked once.

% An example of untidy data
A very simple way for our survey example to became untidy is to include
household-level variables in the same data set,
such as whether the household has a refrigerator.
In this case, some attributes would be measured at
household level, and others at household member level,
and it would not be possible for each column to represent a variable
\textit{and} for each row to represent an observation \textit{at the same time}.
Either the household-level variable would be repeated for all its members,
or member-level variables would be stored in 
\textbf{wide format}.\sidenote{\textbf{Wide data:}
	a table where a single variable is divided into multiple columns,
	for example one for each individual.
}
An alternative example is a dataset on transactions that also contains information

> about the parts involved in each transaction on the same table.

Reviewer 2: parties i think, not parts?

Author: parties! 4efa75e

Sometimes, making sure that data is uniquely and fully identified 
is enough to yield a tidy dataset.
This happens when a data source or survey instrument
contains a single unit of observation.
If you are working with data in this format,
you may skip the tidying process,
which can become quite intricate.
In this case the cleaning process will result in a single dataset.

% Examples of untidy raw data
The most common case of untidy raw data encountered in development research
are datasets consisting of multiple units of observation stored in the same table. 
If your rows include multiple nested observational units,
having an identifying variable for each row doesn't mean having an identifier for each observation.
This is the case of our previous example of untidy data:
a survey that collects both household and household-member level information.
In this case, 
the easiest way to handle the data is often to break it into two tidy datasets:
one at the household level, and one at the member level.
You will use these separate datasets for the rest of the data cleaning process.

% How to tidy data
Creating these two tidy datasets will involve a few different transformations.

> Data collection platforms such as SurveyCTO usually export \textbf{wide datasets},

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Many common survey software export \textbf{wide datasets},
```

and variables observed in nested units are separated into one column per sub-unit,
such as \texttt{age\_1}, \texttt{gender\_1}, \texttt{age\_2}, \texttt{gender\_2}, etc.
To create tidy datasets from this data,
you first need to identify which variables were observed at which levels.
In our example, the presence of a refrigerator was collected at household level (the higher unit),
while age and gender where observed at the member sub-unit.
These two sets of variables will be separated.
Create a tidy dataset containing only the unique row ID and the household level variables.
Then create another dataset containing only the unique row ID and the household-member level variables.
Note that the household-member dataset is still not tidy.
It needs to be \textbf{reshaped}\sidenote{\textbf{Reshape:}
	transform a dataset in such a way that the unit of observation represented by a row changes.}
to a \textbf{long} format.
The reshaped data set will have a new variable indicating the member ID,
and its unique identifier will be the combination of household ID and member ID.
This is a tidy dataset, where
the \texttt{gender} and \texttt{age} variables are each represented by one column.

> The reshape can be done using \texttt{reshape} in Stata, and \texttt{reshape2} or \texttt{pivot\_longer} in R.

Reviewer 2: it would be nice if we could point to a code example (but i don't know if there's any example that would be easily digestible by an outsider)

Author: moved to #466
